[Software Carpentry](http://software-carpentry.org) is a volunteer
organization backed by Mozilla and the Sloan Foundation whose aim is
to teach scientists the basic computing skills they need to get more
done in less time, and with less pain.  In the past 12 months alone,
we have run over 100 two-day events for over 4400 people, in which we
cover:

*   the Unix shell (but we're really teaching people how to automate
    repetitive tasks);

*   version control with Git (but we're really teaching them how to
    track and share their work);

*   Python or R (but we're really teaching them how to grow a program in
    a structured, modular, testable, reusable way); and

*   databases (but we're really teaching them the difference between
    structured and unstructured data).

We currently target graduate students, post-docs, and faculty, but
would like to start reaching people at earlier career stages.  In
particular, we would like to run workshops for undergraduate students
taking part in the [NSF REU program](http://www.nsf.gov/crssprgm/reu)
at or near the start of their time in the lab.  This training will
help them be more productive during their time in REU (graduate
participants typically report that what we teach saves them a day a
week), and also prepare them to work in a world where all aspects of
science are increasingly dependent on computing.

Our curriculum and teaching practices are already evidence-based: the
[training program](http://teaching.software-carpentry.org) we run for
instructors introduces participants to best practices such as peer
instruction, and to underlying concepts such as cognitive load theory
and Vygotsky's Zone of Proximal Development, and more specifically to
ongoing work by researchers including Guzdial & Ericson (Georgia
Tech), Simon (UC San Diego), and Petre (Open University, UK).  One
example of how we translate theory into practice is our near-exclusive
reliance on scientists as instructors, and on our insistence on live
coding during teaching as a way of demonstrating and transferring
authentic practice to learners.

In addition, we have been assessing retention and learning outcomes
since the beginning of our Sloan-funded in January 2012.  Work was
begun by Dr. Jorge Aranda (then at the University of Victoria), and is
now being done by Jory Schossau (Michigan State University) in
collaboration with Prof. Julie Libarkin (also MSU).  Schossau and
Libarkin as using both qualitative and quantitative methods to
determine which of the concepts and practices we teach are being
adopted, and how they are changing scientists' work.

If this proposal is successful, we will use funds to:

1. hire graduate student interns to develop domain-specific "capstone"
   curriculum materials suitable for upper-year undergraduates;

2. run workshops at eight sites each year (most likely timed to
   coincide with the start of the summer REU influx); and

3. expand our assessment efforts to compare REU student outcomes with
   those of other learners, to see what impact this training has on
   them compared with non-participant peers, and to assess and improve
   our instructional techniques.
